The theme of 2020 is "It's Better Than Nothing." Every virtual performance I have seen has been lacking in one way or another. I think this is not controversial, even among presenters.

Each listener must frame this lack as they encounter each artifact. For many, the mere fact that these things exist at all, despite their faults, is enough to suspend, or at least blunt, critical judgment. Carlos Neu's statement that he is not a "music critic" but a "music lover" is one way of explaining that emphasis. GA and Michael Rocha appeal to "uplift" during a "challenging" or "difficult" times. I know what they mean. I experienced vivid "uplift" this summer by sitting through a few Bang on a Can marathons. I was thrilled to hear people play music sitting in their rooms, playing solo music for us: a pure need to perform connected with a pure need to hear.

Nevertheless, I think Lee's review is hardly "mean-spirited" as Neu has it, and apologies to GA, but I doubt anyone even at H&H thinks this is them "at their best." I think Eiseman and Rocha are pointing at the same quality of the piece when one uses the term "slick" and the other "polished" - which is to say, it is something other than spontaneous, live or rough. A claustrophobic air hovers around this performance, due in part to the "stunning and amazing use of the technology" per GA. The use of "COVID" images is inarguably heavy-handed: whether you find that to be distracting or "pitch perfect" (Rocha) is something worth discussing. And perhaps it's just because I'm a callous ass, but the very idea that a music critic should have shown "loving kindness" (Neu) misunderstands the purpose of criticism in the first place.

Despite all that, it turns out that we all agree this H&H Messiah is Better Than Nothing; we disagree on how much better than nothing it might be. The review grinds its complaints pretty fine. I think it is straightforward enough to wonder why a "slick/polished" production with admirable "technology" was needed when a simple live performance by the same forces would have been just as moving. Why anyone wants to defend the use of the Messiah as underscoring - whether to the Zakim bridge or to supermarket shelves devoid of toilet paper - is beyond me. But at least we have an H&H Messiah in 2020. It's better than nothing.